# Function Basics I

### What is a function

A function is a repeatable process or procedure. A real world analogy of a function is the brew button on a coffee machine. The coffee machine has inputs (hot water, and coffee grounds), and outputs (hot coffee). When you press the button to brew a pot of coffee, you are starting a process that should return an expected output to you. The same thing is true in programming. A function takes a set of variables as inputs and returns a value as an output.

We have already seen many functions in action. For example, in the array section, we learned about `push` and `pop`. In GoMix you created functions that deleted or added songs and playlists.These are all functions that operate on an array. Consider the following example:

~~~
var arr = [5,4,3,2,1];
var poppedVal = arr.pop();
console.log(arr);
console.log(poppedVal);
~~~

In the example, we are using the `pop` function. It takes no inputs, and it returns a value which is the last item in the array that has been removed from the array. When you run the code in your console, you'll see the array is now `[5,4,3,2]` and the value of `poppedVal` is `1`.

### Declaring Functions

To be a knowledgeable JavaScript programmer, we need to learn to write our own functions as well. There are multiple ways to write functions in JavaScript. We will cover the differences in more detail later. For now, let's start with one way: a function declaration.

In general, we declare a function in the following way:

~~~
function anyNameYouWantForTheFunction() {
  // As many lines of code as you want
}
~~~

In general, this type of function syntax consists of four parts:

1.  The `function` keyword,
2.  The name of the function (in this case, `anyNameYouWantForTheFunction`),
3.  Any parameters for the function (we'll ignore this for now, but parameters will go inside of the parentheses after the function name),
4.  The function body (the code for the function, which lives inside of the curly braces).

It might seem silly, but it would be good to practice typing this syntax out a few times. You'll be writing functions constantly in JavaScript, so the syntax is something you should commit to muscle memory. Try typing these out in your browser console window:

~~~
function myFunction() {
}

function myOtherFunction() {
}

function yetAnotherFunction() {
}

function okayIGetItThisIsTheSyntaxForFunctions() {
}
~~~

The functions above aren't very interesting, because none of them have a function body. Let's look at an example of a function that actually does something:

~~~
// this is called the function definition - we are ONLY defining the function here
function firstFunction(){
    console.log("I just wrote my first function!");
}
~~~

Now we have declared a function called `firstFunction`, but we have not used the function yet. To execute the code within the function, we must _invoke_ the function. A function is invoked by adding a `()` after the name of the function:

~~~
// to call or invoke the function
firstFunction();
~~~

If you run this code in the Chrome console, you will see the output is "I just wrote my first function" and on the next line, `undefined`. Next, we'll learn where the `undefined` is coming from.

### Returning Values From Functions

In JavaScript, if we do not specifically tell the function to _return_ something, it will return `undefined` when it is finished executing. So how do we tell a function to return something? We use the `return` keyword!

~~~
// this is called the function definition -
// we are ONLY defining the function here

function firstFunction(){
    return "I just wrote my first function!";
}

// to call or invoke the function

firstFunction(); // now we don't see undefined anymore!
~~~

Now our function is returning "I just wrote my first function". To capture that string, let's use a variable:

~~~
var returnValue = firstFunction();
console.log(returnValue);
~~~

Now in the console, you should see "I just wrote my first function". That is the value that was returned from our function call and that is now saved in the `returnValue` variable.

Remember, the `return` keyword can **ONLY** be used inside of a function. let's take a look at another example.

~~~
function secondFunction(){
    return "Hello";
    return "Goodbye";
}

secondFunction(); // "Hello"
~~~

We see from this example that the **return** keyword can only be executed once in a function. Once it is executed, the function is complete and no other lines of code will be executed.

# Exercises

For these exercises, create:

- functions-02.html
- functions-02.js

And use the developer tools in chrome to run and monitor the script.

## functions-02.html

~~~
<html>
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="functions-02.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~

## Exercises 1: Function calls

In functions-02.js, 

Introduce this object:
~~~
const playList = {
  id: '01',
  title: 'Beethoven Sonatas',
  artist: 'Beethoven',
  songs: ['Piano Sonata No. 3', 'Piano Sonata No. 7', 'Piano Sonata No. 10'],
  rating: 4,
};
~~~

- Write a new function called songOuput() which uses a loop to iterate through the songs array and console.log all of the songs. See if you can call this function when you click a link on the html page. The ouput can still be posted to the console.
- Write another funciton called songOutputReverse() which again uses a loop to iterate in the reverse direction, logging the songs starting at 'Piano Sonata No. 10' and finishing with 'Piano Sonata No. 3'. See if you can call this function when you click a link on the html page. The ouput can still be posted to the console.

If we wanted the output presented in the html page rather than the console we could use the return keyword in our songOutputReverse() function. In html use the following code so that you can see the songs output on the web page:

~~~
<div>
  <script>
    document.write(songOutputReverseReturn(""))
  </script>
</div>
~~~

