# Function Basics II

### Conditional Logic With Return Statements

Now that we have an idea of how functions work, let's explore a previous topic and see how we can refactor some boolean logic. Let's imagine we want to write a function that returns true if a random number is over .5 - otherwise the function should return false. Here is one way we can write it

~~~
function isOverPointFive() {
  if (Math.random() > .5) {
    return true;
  } else {
    return false;
  }
}
~~~

This code will work just fine, but remember, the return keyword exits from a function. So if the random number is greater than .5 we will exit the function early and never reach the else condition. So we don't even need the "else" condition! We can refactor our code to look like this:

~~~
function isOverPointFive() {
  if (Math.random() > .5) {
    return true;
  }
  return false;
}
~~~

Much better! If the number is greater than .5, return true and exit the function. Otherwise just return false.

Finally if we wanted to be really fancy - we could use a ternary operator!

~~~
function isOverPointFive() {
  return Math.random() > .5 ? true : false;
}
~~~

Simplifying it even further, we can take advantage of the fact that `Math.random() > .5` returns `true` or `false`. So we don't actually need the ternary operator:

~~~
function isOverPointFive(){
  return Math.random() > .5;
}
~~~

## Exercises

For these exercises, create:

- functions-03.html
- functions-03.js

And use the developer tools in chrome to run and monitor the script.

## functions-03.html

~~~
<html>
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="functions-03.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~


*   Write a function called `myName` that logs your full name. Save your full name to a variable inside of the function body, then use `console.log` to print your name to the console.

    ~~~
    myName(); // if your full name was Elie Schoppik this function would return "Elie Schoppik" 
    ~~~

*   Create an array called `favoriteFoods` which contains the strings "pizza" and "ice cream".

*   Write a function called `randomFood`. The function should use `Math.random` to randomly choose a favorite food in your `favoriteFoods` array to return. For example, your function will return either pizza or ice cream, depending on what you get back from `Math.random`.

    ~~~
    randomFood(); // either returns "pizza" or "ice cream" 
    ~~~

*   Create a variable called `numbers` which is an array that contains the numbers 1 through 10\.

*   Write a function called `displayOddNumbers` which iterates over the `numbers` array and console.logs out all of the numbers that are odd. Here is what that might look like:

    ~~~
    displayOddNumbers(); 
 
    // 1
    // 3
    // 5
    // 7
    // 9
    ~~~

*   Write a function called `displayEvenNumbers` which iterates over the `numbers` array and console.logs out all of the numbers that are even. Here is what that might look like:

    ~~~
    displayEvenNumbers(); 

    // 2
    // 4
    // 6
    // 8
    // 10
    ~~~

*   Create a function called `returnFirstOddNumber` which iterates over the `numbers` array and returns the first odd number it finds

    ~~~
    returnFirstOddNumber(); 

    // 1
    ~~~

*   Create a function called `returnFirstEvenNumber` which iterates over the `numbers` array and returns the first even number it finds

    ~~~
    returnFirstEvenNumber(); 

    // 2
    ~~~

*   Create a function called `returnFirstHalf` which returns the first half of the `numbers` array

    ~~~
    returnFirstHalf(); 

    // [1,2,3,4,5]
    ~~~

*   Create a function called `returnSecondHalf` which returns the second half of the `numbers` array

    ~~~
    returnSecondHalf(); 

    // [6,7,8,9,10]
    ~~~




